We keep hearing this narrative in
Washington about, oh, the Fed's got to
cut rates. So, no, it's all in the
commercial side. It's commercial real
estate, private equity, private credit.
This is where the pain is right now for
banks.
Hey everyone, welcome back to another
episode of WSJ's Take on the Week. I'm
Telles Deemos.
>> And I'm Miriam Godfrieded. Today's show,
a big conversation about banking and
lending. But before we get to that,
let's do what we always do. Give our
takes on the hot topics for the coming
week.
>> Nothing hotter than gold right now,
right?
>> That is true. In fact, gold reached
4,000 per troy ounce on Tuesday and kept
trading above that. So on the last
episode of this show, we talked about
this idea called the debasement trade,
which is essentially that the US dollar
is going to be debased by inflationary
things and that that means that people
want to have an inflation proof asset
diversify away from the US dollar and
that's into gold. But some people are
kind of poo pooing the idea that that is
exactly what is driving this trade. In
fact, um, former guest on this show, Ed
Al Husini, who's at Columbia Thread
Needle, he was saying the debasement
trade idea just wrong, that that's
what's driving it. And, and I think that
was laid out a little bit by our
colleague James Macintosh, who wrote in
his column that, you know, if debasement
is about inflation at its core, then he
said debasement fears seem to be
everywhere except the one place where
they should be most obvious, bonds. And
by that he means that
>> interesting
>> 30-year treasuries for example, which
normally should price in a lot of
inflation risk, haven't really moved.
And so if you're not seeing that fear
there, why are you seeing it in gold? I
think there's just a general feeling of
nervousness that's creeping into the
market and maybe that's what's driving
it. A lot of the gains that have
happened in the stock market have been
powered by this AI trade. And there have
been a number of indicators recently
that some of the assumptions that have
been underlying that have may have been
overly positive. For example, Oracle,
which had a huge stock move when it it
announced this deal with Open AI a few
weeks ago. It's kind of cooled off a
little bit since then. And I think that
that might be people realizing, oh,
maybe some of this stuff is just kind of
like pie in the sky numbers that that
may not pan out.
>> The chief economist at Vanguard Group,
he was quoted in in one of the the
journal's recent market stories, and he
was saying that that what he thinks
you're seeing are basically people
pricing in divergent paths for the AI
trade. On the one hand, AI is
transformative and either delivers, you
know, enormous
productivity and efficiency benefits for
for lots of companies or there's been an
overinvestment and overbuilding and
overhyping and that that will crash. So
eventually maybe these things will all
pan out.
>> They may be overvalued now but still,
you know, going to be revolutionary in
the future. And so that gold represents
basically a bearish view on the stock
market and not necessarily something
about currency debasement and inflation.
Bill Silver, he's uh an economist,
longtime NYU finance professor. Uh he
called gold essentially a form of
catastrophe insurance that people are
buying. There's also
>> I mean let's let's be honest, there's
the my neighbor's buying gold, maybe I
should get some gold, too. There's the
momentum element here as well. Got to
start stockpiling.
>> Got to start stockpiling though.
Interestingly. All right. So, gold in
addition to being a speculative
instrument is also like a thing that
people want, right?
>> It's beautiful.
>> It's beautiful. Has been for centuria.
But in Q2, the World Gold Council was
talking about declining jewelry demand
around the world, particularly from
China.
>> I checked an index that tracks Rolex
prices.
um and the average price for the top 30
Rolex models had actually declined
recently. So if if if gold jewelry and
gold objects are not in as much demand,
maybe that's telling you that there is
something really speculative happening
in the gold market
>> and defensive, right? Like luxury
spending is something that people do
when they're feeling good about the
economy and hoarding gold is something
that they do when they're nervous. I
think I think those two things are
different even though they both involve
gold.
>> Yeah. So the the gold trade will
continue to I think dominate
conversation for a little while. But in
the meantime we have well do we do we
have economic data coming up? Is that a
thing that's still that's still
happening? Are we going to keep doing
that?
>> It's a big question because the
government is still shut down as of this
taping. We don't have the jobs data or
it's been delayed and in the meantime
some private sources of data have
attempted to fill the void. We had data
from Bank of America. We had data from
Carile Group, a firm that I cover, a
private equity firm, which was trying to
extrapolate employment data from its own
portfolio companies.
>> I actually thought that was pretty
interesting because Carile Group, being
a private equity firm, owns hundreds of
companies.
>> Those then employ hundreds of thousands
of people. And they actually came up
with a September payroll number based on
what they saw in their portfolio. They
said that there were 17,000 jobs created
in September, which was slower than in
previous months. So that indicator says
that the weakness that we've seen in the
labor market is continuing
>> is continuing. But the question is
whether the market really trusts these
alternative sources of data. Like can we
live with this or do we really need the
real data? I mean a lot of this stuff is
also kind of extrapolated using
government data and if we don't have the
government data as our typical guidepost
will we be able to continue without it
and I think it could also be fueling the
uneasiness that we're talking about
among investors like if I don't know if
this AI trade is going to pan out and I
don't really know if I can trust the
data that I'm hearing and we have a
dysfunctional government that isn't able
to, you know, operate right now. Maybe
I'm just gonna buy some gold just to be
safe.
>> Yeah. And I and I I I don't think that
there's a widespread trust yet of the
private indicators to really replace
government data. We had our guest Dana
Peterson, the chief economist at the
conference board was on a few weeks ago
and she talked about how government data
remains the gold standard and and
conference board has been producing
economic indicators for a long time, but
the government data is a is a necessary
benchmark. So I think you're right. I
think that there is uncertainty in the
face of not having this data. But in
this vacuum of government data, one
place people could look for at least
economic tips, arrows this upcoming week
are bank earnings. US banks of course
are are giants. They lend to hundreds of
thousands if not millions of companies
and people. and what they say in their
quarterly reports might point us at
least in the direction of what's going
on in the economy.
>> Yeah. I mean, we could look at credit
delinquencies. We can look at their loan
performance. There's a lot of important
data that comes out for the banks and
that people keep a close watch on, which
is why we cover the banks so carefully
every quarter here at the Wall Street
Journal. It's been an interesting year
for banks, too, because we've really
seen a divergence between the stock
price performance of the very biggest
banks, that's your your JP Morgans and
uh Wells Fargos of the world. Those
stocks have been doing very well,
whereas smaller regional banks, those
stocks have not been doing very well.
And that tells us a few interesting
things. One of them might be something
about what's going on with consumers
versus businesses. The big banks really
have giant consumer businesses. they are
huge credit card lenders. Smaller banks
tend to be a little more weighted
towards companies, middle market
companies, for example. So maybe that's
telling us something about the way
people feel about the economy. And in
the conversation we had earlier this
week with our guest Chris Whan, a
longtime bank analyst and chairman of
Whan Global Adviserss, we talked about
how actually he's seeing more concern in
the companies in the commercial side of
banks businesses than he is in the
consumer. And I thought that was pretty
interesting because we talk a lot about,
you know, what's going on with credit
card debts and are people spending and
things like that. We don't talk so much
about what's happening in the business
side of the economy.
>> I can't wait to hear more of that
conversation. That is coming up in a
bit.
>> Welcome back. We're here with Chris
Whan. He is a longtime banking analyst
and chairman of Whan Global Advisors and
also editor of the Institutional Risk
Analyst. Chris, welcome to the show.
>> Thank you.
>> We talk all the time on this show and in
in society in general about, you know,
the significance of the AI trade and how
important technology stocks are to the
S&P 500, but what people might not know
is what the second most important group
of stocks are, and that's financials.
They are the second largest sort of
waiting in the S&P 500. And financials
have not been performing quite as well
as the rest of the market this year.
They're up as a sector about 11%. Uh the
overall S&P 500's up about 15%. Uh
infoch stocks by the way just for
context are up around 24ish%.
So what's happening? Why are financials
the biggest of which are the banks? You
know your JP Morgans and Bank of
Americas and Wells Fargo of the world.
Why do you think this sector's overall
been kind of underperforming the market?
>> Well the broad sector if you include all
of them we look at the top hundred banks
in our work. uh is fairly modest. You
know, they're barely making 1% return on
assets. They don't have a lot of demand
for loans. So, as you can imagine, the
demand for the stocks is really a
function of earnings.
>> So, what what's what's different about
those very large banks? And I know that,
you know, JP Morgan, uh Goldman Sachs,
Morgan Stanley, a lot of those banks
have beaten the market this year. So,
what's what's going on with the biggest
banks?
>> So, all of these models are different.
It's a coral reef. None of these banks
are the same. JP Morgan, enormous uh
institutional investment shop, but also
half bank. So they tend to benefit
really in just almost transcendental
terms because their costs are 10 points
lower than the rest of the group. You
raised an interesting point about how,
you know, some of these biggest banks
have these extremely diversified
businesses and we know that the Wall
Street units of these biggest banks,
their their trading desks have done
extraordinarily well with all the
volatility happening. You know, all the
things that have sort of maybe slowed or
impaired the economy, you know,
uncertainty about tariffs, immigration
policy, those things have royd the
markets and a lot of things are up this
year. And so that's been good for those
banks trading businesses. So can banks
essentially perform well even if the
economy is only doing okay or even not
very well. Are they so diversified that
they're almost telling us something
totally different about the financial
sector versus the real economy?
>> No, I would say management focus and
business model are still very important.
The business models in all of these
institutions are very important to
understanding how they're going to do
and why. Synchrony. It's a white label
credit card business. They have a a
gross spread which is their their total
earnings off loans of 20%. That's almost
twice as much as city. High-risisk
business, but they make a lot of money.
>> And a white label credit card business
means that they provide if you have a
card from a retailer that is, you know,
you use it in their store. That's right.
Uh that card is not the retail company.
So, how is that credit card business
doing amid everything going on in the
economy? What's your outlook for the
credit card business?
>> The default rates are low. The credit
costs are low. So, so far so good. What
everybody's worried about, what we've
been waiting for for several years is
that consumer recession, but it hasn't
happened,
>> right?
>> If anything, the banks have been
releasing credit reserves all year. In
fact, they were up statistically in the
second quarter because of Capital One
buying Discover. Other than that, the
numbers would have gone down a lot. So
you you have this really weird situation
where everybody thinks the consumer is
hurting. We keep hearing this narrative
in Washington about, oh, the Fed's got
to cut rates. So no, it's all in the
commercial side. It's commercial real
estate, private equity, private credit.
This is where the pain is right now for
banks. It's really interesting to hear
you say that that you're more focused on
problems in the commercial side of
banking than the consumer side because I
think we can all think of stresses on
consumers for example interest rates on
credit cards are very high. Uh we know
that the labor uh reports have not been
as strong lately but what is happening
on the commercial side because it seems
like in a lot of cases businesses have
been doing pretty well. They just got an
extension of big tax cuts recently. So,
so explain why you think we're seeing
that pressure on the commercial side of
banks businesses.
>> One of the big pain points for lenders
and also for for funds has been uh
private equity. Uh there's an enormous
amount of credit exposure inside of
private equity. And many of these
companies can't be sold at nearly the
valuations that the private equity
manager pretends that they have.
>> So, this is a private equity firm. It
took a company private a few years ago.
Now, it needs to resell it. but you're
saying they're not getting the price
they want and so they're sort of stuck
with this company
>> and they have investors that they put
into that asset. So what you're seeing
is that there's kind of a churn in
private equity and there's also bank
loans to these companies that often have
to be written down. The other big thing
I think since co has been commercial
real estate there has been an episodic
change
>> that's that's office buildings office
buildings
>> and apartment buildings. apartment
buildings, right? Uh healthcare
facilities. Yeah.
>> And these are assets that for 60, 70
years before were always going up in
value. And that meant that every seven
years a developer could refinance the
building and take cash out. It was a
source of capital for him to go off and
do something else. Today, you're lucky
if these valuations are stable. In many
cases, they're falling. So, I think that
there's still a lot of question marks in
terms of what these assets are worth.
And a lot of banks are being forced to
write down loans on commercial
properties that they may have made
during COVID or a little before. These
are typically seven-year loans. So once
they come up, what happens? The bank
looks at the property and sees that it's
gone down in value. They don't want the
building. They don't want to foreclose.
So they often will modify the loan or or
really just provide forbearance. And one
of the interesting things is that the
regulators have recently made changes to
how we account for modified loans. If
they're modified, in other words, if
they reduce the loan payment and put
part of the principal in the back to be
repaid when the building is sold, we're
going to pretend that it's not modified
after 12 months.
>> When banks start reporting earnings,
what are things that you would look at
deeper in the weeds that other people
might not be paying attention to to see
if this thesis is playing out? First and
foremost, you want to see if their
demand for loans is increasing now that
rates have been coming down. And by the
way, interest rates at banks have been
falling for a year. Loan rates have been
falling and deposit rates as well. They
don't have a lot of demand for loans, so
they don't need all of those extra
deposits. Also, they're getting relief
in terms of bank capital rules. So,
again, they are releasing liquidity.
They're not renewing debt. I think we'll
all just assume that the Wall Street
side, the trading and investing side of
most of these universal banks is going
to be up because the markets are pretty
robust. And then the real issue for the
future is credit. Do we see them
starting to put away more reserves
because they think that loan losses will
be higher next year? And one uh
important point to make is that the
Trump administration has rolled back all
of the special treatment that we had
during COVID for forbearance, for loan
modifications, everything else. That's
done uh as of October 1. So, you're
going to see the cost of credit,
especially consumer credit, much more
visibly than we have over the last 5
years. And that's going to be something
I'm definitely watching for because
that'll force the banks to to start to
put away more money. You say the cost of
credit, you mean that in a classic uh
when the tide goes out, you see who's
wearing their swim trunk situation.
You're saying that some some of the
special programs that existed during co
in the B administration have finally
rolled off.
>> That's right.
>> And and that the banks are now more kind
of directly exposed to to credit.
>> Where credit is most I think acute right
now is the bottom quarter of consumers.
If you look particularly at the FHA
market, which is where low-income
borrowers, first-time home buyers
typically go, uh, delinquencies in the
mid- teens, there's half a million loans
are already underwater because of the
price of the house falling. You're
starting to see weakness around the
country in certain home markets. But the
other thing I think we got to factor
into the equation when we talk about
banks and demand for credit is that
there's all these non-banks that have
come into the marketplace over the last
five six years. If you go out and count
the number of equityfunded
consumer platforms that have just
suddenly appeared on the scene offering
very attractive terms. That's part of
the reason why banks aren't seeing the
same degree of pull from consumers when
it comes to demand for credit. It seems
like in banking it's it's companies that
are maybe outside of the S&P 500. Uh
your SFI, Chime, which recently went
public. Obviously, Robin Hood just
joined the S&P 500, but that's maybe why
the sort of financial sector that we see
in the S&P 500 is underperforming. And
so, do you think investors should really
look outside of that at some of these
smaller, more upstart type type finance
companies?
>> Yes. But I will say this, you have to do
your homework and be careful because
there's going to be consolidation. Uh we
lost almost 40 banks last quarter
because of mergers. These are much very
small institutions typically, but that's
going to continue both in banks and in
non-banks. It's a network model. You
want to see how many people you can
attract to your network and keep. So
Rocket merges with Mr. Cooper. What is
that about? Those are two mortgage
>> two big mortgage shops. But they are
creating a network millions of customers
inside their wall and indeed over the
next you know few years a lot of their
new volume new revenue is going to come
from their existing customers. JP Morgan
same way they have a very high-end
customer but again the model is the
same. They want to keep those assets
inside the bank. They want to provide
all sorts of services for that customer.
So they don't have a reason to leave.
>> And so what does consolidation mean for
investors? Does that mean that some of
your bank stocks might be bit up because
somebody's buying them and paying a
premium to buy them? Or is that a risk
to you as an investor?
>> In an industry where you don't have a
lot of organic growth, that's one of the
few ways that you can get growth. So a
lot of CEOs or some will use M&A as a
way to grow earnings and they may be
destroying value while they're doing
that. As a investor, you want to really
be focused on how does this bank make
money? How do they manage their assets?
Take a look at the information you can
get from the Fed uh about the different
bank holding companies as performance
reports that they publish and that'll
show you how they compare with their
peers. That's the most important thing
you need to know about a bank.
>> Chris, you and I have talked about
mortgages and home loans for for for a
long time. What's your outlook in that
part of the business? We know that
mortgage rates have come down a little
bit lately, but they're still not low by
any means. Is that enough to boost banks
businesses here? And where do you see
mortgage rates going? Are they going to
keep going down or hard to say?
>> Well, the the first thing you have to
say about residential mortgages is that
this is a non-bank business. threearters
of this business is now done by
non-banks.
>> Most people don't even go to a bank to
get their mortgage. They're going to
>> historically, you know, brokers have
always been the ones that make
mortgages. They are usually the first
person to talk to the customer and they
would then get a signed loan application
and sell it to a big aggregator like a
penny or like a United Wholesale
Mortgage or even like a JP Morgan. Now,
the thing about mortgage loans most
people don't understand is they don't
follow the bond market. Lenders assign
coupons to loans. And so, since July,
what happened? The mortgage uh industry
was pushing coupons down from 6 and 12,
6 and 78 down almost 6% in the end of
August. What was going on? The bond
market wasn't moving that much. lenders
were trying to get in front of a Fed
rate cut so they could capture more of
those assets and they were willing to
take a loss on those loans early on in
order to keep the servicing assets. So
in other words, they sell a mortgage
note to an investor in a mortgage back
security, but they keep the servicing
because they get paid a quarter of a
point a year to take care of your
mortgage.
>> So it seems like everybody agrees that
the Fed is probably going to keep
cutting. What impact will that have
across financials? What does that mean
for banks? What does that mean for these
mortgage companies? Is that good or bad
ultimately for their economics?
>> For the banks, it's going to meet higher
volumes, but for most of them on the
commercial side, in other words, banks
lend money to the non-banks who are
going to make you your mortgage. The
banks tend to want to do wholesale
business and they'll let the non-banks
and the brokers deal with the direct to
consumer exposures. What I think banks
really want to see is higher commercial
loans. They want to see more demand from
businesses. They want to see more demand
from any range of of commercial
borrowers. And ironically, who who are
the biggest borrowers today? It's the
fintech companies and the funds. You
know, loans generally are growing about
2% a year right now, but the loans to
the funds and the fintax, everything
else growing 15% a year, and that's
causing a number of people some concern.
So, I think, you know, if we see rates
fall, hopefully it's going to be helpful
across the board for banks. But the one
thing to remember is the Fed's a net
seller of mortgage securities right now.
They're letting their portfolio run off
>> the bonds that they bought during,
>> right? And what that means is that the
banks are are essentially facing and the
non-banks too are facing higher spreads.
the difference between that kind of
average yield between a seven and
10-year Treasury and a mortgage coupon
today is almost a point and a half. That
doesn't help. During quantitative
easing, when the Fed was buying all
those securities, it was less than a
point. And so I think for a lot of uh
investors and also a lot of lenders
those widespreads that we see today in
the loan market are quite extraordinary
because then you look at the rest of the
market you look at uh the corporate bond
market where people are able to borrow
money
>> very cheaply
>> extremely cheap so the real I think
headline for this whole conversation is
there's still a der of duration out
there a der of paper for banks to buy
for investments and they're also having
trouble creating ing more to meet the
demand from investors and it's a global
demand. This isn't just investors in the
United States. This is investors all
over the world.
>> All right, when we come back, we've got
one more question for Chris Whan.
[Music]
>> Welcome back, Chris. What are one or two
indicators that you'll be looking for
when the banks report earnings? What are
the most important couple of things that
you might be looking for?
>> First and foremost, we want to see uh
how much exposure they have to the
equity markets. That's a big worry. Uh
the equity markets have managed to
import risk not only into the banking
industry but also into the insurance
sector. So if the markets suddenly
reverse, if we start to see a uh
selloff, it's going to impact banks much
more than it has in the past. The other
thing of course is uh is just basic
funding and deposits. As we saw with
Silicon Valley Bank, if you get a
surprise, if you get a period of stress,
the deposits can walk out of the bank
overnight. And again, that is something
which I think we still don't fully
understand, but I do uh worry about
because if this market corrects, it's
going to hit the funding of some of the
biggest banks very hard. Chris, I think
you make a really interesting point
about looking at the equity markets,
meaning, you know, the prices of stocks
have gone up. And I don't know if people
appreciate enough how good that's been
for the business of a lot of banks,
investment managers, higher stocks means
they're making more money. There's a
bigger pool for them to earn fees on.
And so that reversal has some risk for
for banks and other financial companies.
It
>> it definitely does. And banks are more
comfortable being lenders to businesses
than they are to consumers. But lending
to businesses also has a lot of risk.
>> Do companies high stock prices make it
easier to lend to them?
>> Of course. Of course.
>> So again, a stock correction there would
also be a risk to to lending.
>> Very much. Especially if they're using
the stock as collateral for the loan,
which is very often the case, especially
in private equity and private credit.
The whole pretext for the private credit
boom in the past couple years is higher
stock prices. So, if we don't have that,
then all of a sudden the rationale for
that market goes out the window.
>> Wow. Interesting. Well, it all comes
back to watching watching the S&P 500
and the stock market. Uh, there you go.
Easy enough. Uh, all right, Chris,
thanks so much for joining us. This has
been great.
>> My pleasure.
[Music]
They trick lighting to make us look,
>> you know, 20 years younger,
>> more attractive,
>> more attractive. Like there were two
cool people sitting here having this
conversation.
[Music]